Away we go. This is Ron Shorn taping Tom Barnes at
the University of California, Berkeley on June
8th, 1993. Okay, let's try it. For the record, Tom,
what's your name? Thomas Brady Barnes III. And
where and when were you born? I was born in
Columbus, Ohio on August 17th, 1944. When did you
first get interested in astronomy? Really,
during my freshman week when I was at the
University of Rochester, I went there as a
chemistry major and decided that I ought to be sure
of that. So I sat down with the catalog, read all the
way through the catalog of majors and said,
astrophysics sounds right. I decided I had been
more interested in astronomy through my growing
up years than chemistry, so I switched majors.
When did you get your bachelor's degree? 1966 from
Rochester. And then where did you go to grad
school? University of Toronto. Why? I wanted to
get, I wanted to do my work with, in Variable Stars
and Don Ferney was, and still is, at the University
of Toronto and he had done some really nice work on
Cepheids, so I picked Toronto. Okay, and when you
got there, of course, you took classes and
everything, but what did you do your thesis on and
under who? I did a master's thesis on secret galaxy
variability with Don Ferny, and then I did my Ph.D.
thesis also with Ferny on statistical parallaxes
of MIRA variables to get the absolute magnitude.
Okay, then you get your Ph.D., and it's time to get a
real job. Where did you go? I went to McDonald
Observatory as a W.J. McDonald Fellow in the fall
of 1970. How did that start? Did you see a notice on
the bulletin board or something like that? In
1970, when I started making applications, the job
market was really tight. I mean, it got even
tighter later, but it was pretty tight. And so I
applied for darn near everything I could find, and
I honestly don't remember where I saw the notice on
it. And I don't remember that I paid much attention
to it as an application other than I sent it in, as I
did a whole lot of other ones. And then I got a call
from Harlan Smith offering it to me in the spring of
70. And I had a couple of other things pending at
that time that hadn't been resolved. One, for
example, at the University of Western Ontario.
that after talking with various faculty members,
I decided that I would drop out of the other ones and
take the MacDonald Fellowship. Okay, so your
first contact with Harlan was over the telephone,
but what was your first trip to Texas like?
Actually, I met Harlan before I went to Texas. I met
him at the IAU in Grenoble. in uh in august
september whenever it was in 1970 and uh i remember
thinking when i met him that this is a character
because every word he said about texas was it's the
best in the world i remember distinctly him
telling me about the accountant at texas keeping
the books bill geist and how he was the best
accountant in the world and i thought This is
really remarkable that everything there is the
best in the world, because it wasn't quite the way
I'd heard it from people before I went there, that
there was some concern about, well, it was kind of a
new department, a struggling department, but
they had some big telescopes and a lot of access to
those telescopes, which is why I went. So I moved
there in October 1970, and...
The department and the observatory were still
housed in Painter Hall, the old physics building.
Right within close range of the Texas Tower.
That's right. In fact, this was not long after the
Texas Tower incident, and that actually didn't
give me any pause. I didn't consider that as a
negative for going to Texas. It was purely an
astronomical decision.
When you got there, how... Roughly, how big was the
department? I mean, how many staff and how many
people at McDonald and the department? I mean,
it's hard for me to remember because it was almost
23 years ago. But I suppose there were probably six
or eight faculty, I guess, maybe ten. I don't
remember how many grad students there were. The
conditions in Pater were very crowded. It was
really, we were packed. into that particular
building the floors we occupied on that building
right up into the attic so it was pretty crowded
conditions but it didn't seem to bother people by
and large in fact it was kind of nice in some ways
because we interacted more strongly than when
you're on three separate floors that's right um
what did you do when you first went there uh well i
went as a postdoc and so i got an office with uh with
bill hubbard and uh and Bruce,
God, all of a sudden I can't remember his last name,
Josephson Junction Fellow.
And I occupied the desk that Steve Little had
before he left. He was a previous postdoc. So I
started doing a program that I had planned to do,
which was 4N hypersensitized plates of globular
clusters to do VRI photometry of miras.
Okay, so you're using ammoniated foreign plates.
That didn't last very long because I discovered
pretty quickly, even with the 82-inch telescope,
that I wasn't going to be able to get what I wanted
out of the plates. And so I looked around for
something else to do during the two postdoc years,
and I discovered that David Lambert was working
with Reinhardt Beer. of Jet Propulsion Lab with a
Fourier transform spectrometer on the 2.7 meter,
which at that time was still third largest
telescope in the world. And this Fourier
transform spectrometer was state of the art at
that time. It stayed that way for three or four
years. And it was fascinating. It was highly
mathematical. They needed somebody with some
observational experience involved. And so I kind
of fell in with that group. began working FTS stuff
for six or eight months and then David offered to
move me on to one of these grants. So I dropped off
the fellowship and I stayed with Fourier
Transformers for about six years.
One of the reasons I'm asking you is that you're at a
place, and you're the assistant director now, I
guess, at McDonald's, that is very heavily
involved in planetary work, one of the few places
it is. But you're not really a planetary
astronomer, so you've got a different point of
view. I mean, you're not going to lose your grant if
you tell the truth, all right? When you came to UT,
originally,
what would you say was the status of planetary
astronomy at that time? Was it an integral part of
the department, or was it a big deal, or did people
just suffer it to be?
I think it was pretty clearly an integral part of
the department from my perspective. In fact, a lot
of the time I spent observing with that FTS
instrument was on planets, was on Jupiter,
because that was what Reinhardt Beer was
interested in doing. We also did long period
variables and some other things which were more of
interest to me and to David Lambert. But we got
tremendously great amounts of observing time on a
huge telescope, mostly because, I'm pretty sure,
because of the planetary connection of that
program. In fact, I think my one planetary
publication is I'm last author of about five or six
on the first detection of deuterium off the Earth.
which was induterated methane in Jupiter from
that instrument. There was a lot of planetary
astronomy going on on the 107-inch or 2.7-meter. I
mean, Ed Barker was there doing it. There were a
number of other people involved. Bill Hubbard was
there with planetary interiors work. To me, it
seemed like it was clearly an integral part of the
program. One thing that I think is a mistake in big
and bright in the history of McDonald's is that no
one who was not a faculty member at UT was ever
mentioned. So that leaves out Ice Spinrad, it
leaves out Topia, and it leaves me. And we all,
between us, got a substantial amount of telescope
time. Was there ever any... And, of course, that
was because NASA said, you know, you've got to
use... We give you the money, you've got to do it.
Was there any... jealousy, rage among UT faculty
members about us outsiders using the telescope? I
don't remember any from then. I remember a lot of
that later. But I don't remember any from then.
Now, that may be because I was so intent as a new
postdoc in learning this system and getting
established myself that I wasn't paying
attention to it. I also wasn't connected in to the
faculty and those sorts of discussions to the
extent that I am today. So I may have just missed it.
But I don't recall there being any anti-solar
system stuff at that time in the early 70s. Was
there, were planetary astronomers looked down on
by real, quote, unquote, astronomers? And this is
like a Toronto and places like that that didn't
have any planetary problems. Were you aware of
anything like that? No, I wasn't. I never got that
sense at Toronto or at Rochester, although at
neither place were there any planetary
astronomers. And so the topic most likely didn't
come up very much. Do you think planetary
astronomy is real astronomy? Sure. Sure, I sure
do. I think it's exciting stuff. Now, as I recall,
NASA for many years had this block grant for
planetary astronomy that they gave to McDonald,
and then in, what, 88 or 87 or something, it was
switched to individuals or something like that?
That's right.
I became aware of this later on when I got involved
in administrative matters, but NASA provided a
facilities grant, or a block grant as it was
called, to McDonald in exchange for access to the
McDonald facilities, principally the 107-inch,
by planetary astronomers throughout the U.S.
They had to compete for the telescope time, which
in the early years meant that Harlan had to agree to
give it to you. Later, there got to be a pack and a
real competition that was involved. I was the last
person in the world, and I guess because Harlan
suggested I do it, to write my letters asking for
telescope time in pen and ink on paper. He got a kick
out of that. But I mean, no kidding. I would really
write them on pen and ink in paper. And I still got
some Xerox copies of that stuff. And I guess he was
the last observatory. I mean, he was the last
old-time observatory director that made the
decisions without a... observing committee or
anything like that. Is that true? That's right.
During most of the 70s, now I'm not sure what year it
changed, but it was right around 1978. It may have
been a year or two earlier or a year or two,
certainly not more than a year or so later, that
prior to that time, Harlan kept a huge poster board
of graph paper, basically, on in his office and he
had each telescope and he had the calendar on the
x-axis and each telescope was listed on the y-axis
and he would write in and pencil the observing
programs and since and he wrote him in on pencil
because he would change them right up to the day of
the run there were times when when my observing
runs were were changed at the last minute for a
variety of reasons none of which seemed to me good
at the time but i'm sure they were good in his eyes uh
and that went on until um uh as i say the late 70s when
the scheduling was turned over to david evans and
then maybe pretty quickly rob robinson uh began
helping him with it and they did it in a similar way
in the sense that they had golf tees and pegboard
and they they reproduced harlan's uh graph paper
system and a different mechanism, but it was still
the same thing. You submitted your proposals.
They sort of read them and decided who got
telescope time and put the pegboard up
accordingly. And then it was in the early to
mid-'80s, we went over to an actual TAC, the
Telescope Allocation Committee, which reviewed
the proposals, made decisions, and those
decisions were honored by Harlan and now by the
current director, Frank Batch. Honest Engine
Scout Center is committee allocation of
telescope time better than beneficent despot.
I've thought a lot about that because I've seen
both of them at Texas, and my conclusion is that
from the point of view of the science that gets
done, I don't think it makes a worth of difference.
From the point of view of the feelings of the people
getting – Proposing for time and getting the time
it makes a tremendous difference because When
there's a group of colleagues who evaluate one's
proposal come to their best decision and then
render that judgment there is more acceptance
than when a single individual says, I've made the
decision based on my best reading of the
circumstances. So I don't think it makes any
difference in the science that gets done. I don't
think it made any difference when it went from
Harlan to David Evans to the TAC in who got
telescope time. I haven't done the statistics to
prove it, but I don't believe there was any
difference. But there was a tremendous
improvement in the acceptance of the telescope
schedule by the people listed on it. Now,
currently, you're the assistant director at
McDonald's, and Frank is on vacation. So I'll hit
you, because usually it's like the co-pilot
always lands the plane. The assistant director
does all the work. What's the status of planetary
astronomy at UT and Texas today? I think it's as
healthy as it was at any time in the history of
Texas. There's obviously the difference that
there is not someone with an intense interest in
planetary astronomy in the directorship
position. That changed when Harlan retired as
director and Frank came in. Frank's a radio
astronomer interested in galaxies, in galactic
structure. And he's not hostile to planetary
astronomy, but it's not of intense interest to him
such as it was for Harlan. So that changed. The
quality of the research hasn't changed at all.
We've got both the Cochrans are still there. Larry
Trafton's there. Ed Barker's there. There are a
couple of postdocs that have come and gone working
in that area. Artie Hotzis is there now working
with Bill Cochran. The emphasis of the program has
changed somewhat as the years go by, but that's
normal in any research program.
I think the quality of the program now is as good as
it's ever been. The amount of telescope time
granted to planetary astronomy in this
competitive attack environment has stayed high.
It consistently exceeds the amount of time that's
been funded by NASA. We still get quite a few
outside observers coming in. There's Drew Potter
from JSC. There's Alan Stern from Southwest
Research. Institute and others who come in to make
use of the McDonald facilities. So I think it's as
healthy as it's ever been. Here's something that
goes for astronomy in general as well as planetary
astronomy. Times are getting tough, folks. What
do you see in the future? And I think planetary
astronomy will just, because we both agree it's
part of astronomy, so it's going to rise and fall
with the tide. What do you think's in the future for
the next couple of years in a couple of decades With
respect to
planetary astronomy I Think for McDonald things
are really looking up McDonald overall fields
because on April 1st the Regents approved the
spectroscopic survey telescope which is The
primary will have a hexagonal shape, 91 hexagonal
segments put together to make a hex primary, which
will be 10 meters by 11 meters. So it'll be a huge
telescope to go at McDonald, assuming that we can
get all our partners to sign the legal agreements
and that the bids for construction come back
within budget. We will have that in full operation
by sometime in 1997. And you're going to put it on
flat top? It'll be on flat top. Which is now called
Mount? Mount Fulks. Right. But it's flat top to us
all the time, right? Right. So I see the prospects
from McDonald being outstanding. And the
spectroscopic survey tells us, though, that we
dedicated the spectroscopy in a four-minute
field of view, so it's not appropriate for
large-scale imaging, small imaging, okay. I see
planetary astronomy having a very, very big role
to play in that. One question that I have on my list
here is how well do you think astronomers in
general and planetary astronomers in particular
have sold their field? And it's particularly
appropriate to ask you because I think McDonald
has done a tremendous job compared to, say, Mount
Wilson and Palomar, who generally have a the
public be damned attitude, I think it's fair to
say. What do you, I mean, you're obviously doing a
lot with the general public, and as you know, Susan
Shorn is the assistant editor for Star Date. That
was Harlan's idea to do it, and do you think that has
worked out well to really get the public involved?
Oh, yeah. It makes a tremendous difference in how
we are treated within the state of Texas by the
legislature and the university. Frank has said to
me that he has sat in meetings with prominent
members of the legislature, or lunches with
prominent members of the legislature, and
friends of the observatory who are discussing the
role of McDonald with these people, who have said,
that their connection to McDonald is through
Stardate, through the magazine, through the
radio program, that they take great pride in
driving through Washington, D.C., and hearing on
the radio Stardate come on in reference to the
University of Texas at Austin. So our public
outreach program is very effective for us in
maintaining a presence with the political
structure in the state of Texas. But that's, I
mean, that is a reason for doing it. It's not the
primary reason for doing it, in my mind, nor was it
in Harlan's, nor is it in Frank's. That's a spinoff
from, you do it because the people who have paid the
bill for all of our research have a right to hear the
results from that research in a way they can
understand.
You have a Huge number of other things going on with
the public, you know, little observing sessions
down at the visitor center and the visitor center.
Have you ever thought about painting the shutters
yellow and putting up a McDonald's on the
mountain? Because everyone always expects...
McDonald's Golden Arches. I know the public
oftentimes get confused between McDonald's, the
restaurant chain, and McDonald's Observatory,
but no, we haven't actually thought about putting
Yellow Arches out there. Maybe if the funding
situation gets better. Have you ever approached
McDonald's? No, not that I know of. Because, I
mean, I don't know how many times I've been on the
mountain, people say, you know, where do we get the
hamburgers? And the second question is, where's
the gasoline station? Right. And where's the
restroom?
But that is in marked contrast to a number of other
observatories that we could name, that probably
because they had private funding sources, and I'm
talking about Molson and Bellarmine, had only
discussed for the general public. There's two
things that underlie that, I think. one of them is
that in the will from w.j mcdonald in which he gave
the bequest to the university to uh like to erect
and equip i can remember the quote it's something
like to erect and equip an astronomical an
observatory for the study and the promotion of the
study of the science of astronomy and that
promotion of the study of the science of astronomy
in his will has been used as the justification for a
strong public outreach program. But I think that
reason is more of a post-hope justification
rather than something that started it. It really
started and was maintained and grew because
Harlow Smith believed in it. He was absolutely
dedicated to a strong public outreach program. It
was one of the key things he wanted to accomplish,
and he did accomplish it. personal opinion, why do
you think that kind of attitude is so rare among
astronomers? Especially since now, basically,
we're all supported by public opinion one way or
another. You know, I think the root reason for it,
in my mind, is that most researchers are not very
facile in dealing with other people. They're
outstanding in dealing with the technicalities
of the science, in dealing with the mathematics,
with the instrumentation, with the observing
programs, with the observing plans, with the
getting of the money, the writing of the grants,
the writing of the papers. But in everyday normal
social environments, I think an awful lot of
high-tech researchers, like astronomers, are
not very facile. and that they're uncomfortable
with it. So there's a tendency to focus in on the
nitty-gritty of the research and stay away from,
and therefore later to put down, the part of
research where it's communicating at a very
elementary level the fundamentals of what we've
discovered. And unless you're really good at
communicating with the public, such as Harlan
was, or to use the current example, Carl Sagan,
unless you're really good at that, it's hard to do
and if it's hard to do people tend to stay away from
it if they stay away from it then they tend to think
well that's not very important because i'm not in
it it's not very important it tends to be downrated
all right now now it's time for funny stories um all
right you got any funny harland smith stories I
mean, for example, in Big and Bright, they never
mentioned the spectrum of the Swiss Army knife,
which is probably before your time. That was
before my time. I've heard that many times, never
directly from Harlan, so I can neither confirm nor
deny it. What was the story? Well, the story was
that, in fact, I did hear that from Harlan one time.
I did hear that from him one time. He mentioned it to
me once with respect to i can't remember what to
respect but in any event the story was that he was
observing on the 82 inch telescope at coup day and
that um the iron arc spectrum which was produced by
two electrodes uh close to each other and a high uh
electrical current flowing between the citizen
arrangement right so it just gave you a big bright
arc um that the arc was weak and that Harlan said,
well, we need to adjust the arc to make it brighter
on the plates. And so he pulled out his handy Swiss
Army knife and inserted it between the electrodes
to make the adjustment with the power on. And it is
said that, in this story, I don't know if it's true
or not, that it vaporized the blade of the knife,
which is... And you
can also see molecular bands from the handle of the
Swiss Army knife. Because the shutter was open,
wasn't it? I don't know that. Supposedly there is a
spectrum that exists. Well, I've heard that. I
don't know whether that's true. It's also told
that Harlan went out and threw the knife down the
mountainside. Now, that does not sound like
Harlan. I don't believe that happened. It doesn't
sound like Harlan. I don't think he would do that.
But whether there's a plate that shows these, I
don't know. Any other stories? Well, Harlan, he
had a tendency to focus in his mind on what he was
doing to the exclusion of other things going on
around him. And we spent quite a few nights
observing on a project to attempt to measure
whether or not there was a time limit
cosmologically time variability in Planck's
constant. This was in the early 70s. And
we did a lot of cast grain observing on the 107 at
that time together.
There were several nights when we would have the
platform up off the floor, raised up to get access
to the cast instrument, and Harlan would say, I'm
going to check the weather, which meant going
outside on the catwalk and walking around the
dome. And he would just charge for the door and walk
right off the platform. Now, at no time was the
platform more than maybe two feet off the floor on
any of these occasions, but it would happen night
after night. He would be so focused on what he was
doing that he wouldn't pay any attention to his
surroundings. And he would fall off and skid along
on the floor and look back and say, I must remember
not to do that. And then he'd do it again. Do you
think Harlan could have done even more had he done a
little less?
I think that's a very good question. It
goes to the heart of what Harlan was like in his
research and his directing, which is that He
attempted to move on all possible fronts
simultaneously. And it worked like a champ when
there was lots of money. Because he would fund
nearly everything. He never met an idea he didn't
like. And that meant we had an incredible number of
things going on simultaneously. And that was
great when there was money to support them.
Because some would plan to pan out, some would not.
And if they didn't pan out, he'd let them go, with
some exceptions. But when the mid-80s hit, and
suddenly money began to get tight when the second
oil crunch hit, and literally the depression hit
in Texas. And the 300-inch telescope got
eliminated. We entered an environment in which
money was ever tighter. And that mode of operation
of expanding on all fronts, funding everything
possible, was simply incompatible with the
fiscal situation. And it got more and more
frustrating for Harlan as he attempted to do this
and could not. And I think that was one of the key
reasons why he chose to retire from the
directorship in 1989. That he had, McDonald
Observatory had entered an era in which it wasn't
fun for him to be director anymore. When we had lots
of money, I think if he had focused it on fewer
efforts, we would have made a lot more progress in
those efforts, but there may have been some other
things that we accomplished that never would have
got started. It's a different style, the two
different styles. It wouldn't be Harlan if he was
different. It wouldn't have been Harlan. He was
not focused like that on specific research areas.
a tremendously broad interest. I got a lot of
comments the other week at Austin about the fact
that Harlan was loyal and maybe sometimes too
loyal, and we're talking here like image tube and
everything like that. Yes. Which I guess is the
greatest fiasco of his reign. Yes. Did they ever
get anything out of that? They brought the , the
electronographic image tube was brought to the
point where it actually obtained astronomical
data that were never used. to the best of my
knowledge, they were never used because there
were no astronomers tied into the particular
program. That is that that development was funded
by Harlan and conducted by Paul Gribbavel with
almost no astronomical expertise attached to it.
There were no astronomers demanding that this get
operational so I can use it for my research. There
weren't any. And so when it became operational,
there weren't any to use it. And it became
operational almost at the same time that CCDs came
in. There was a period of a few years where the river
ball camera could have been used for astronomical
uses, but it was too late. There were no
astronomers involved. By the time any
astronomers could have got involved, CCDs had
beat it.
Do you think you, and I talked to Greg Shields, and
I'll let you know, maybe I did tell you the other
night, But we were talking in the library last
week, and we both felt that actually in both of us,
there was only one time in the 30-some years that
I've known Harlan almost as long as Greg that we
ever got to know the real Harlan. When you met him,
he was open and all that, but do you think there was
still a little curtain or something like that? Oh,
yeah. I worked really closely with Harlan for 11
years. I had the shared secretary in the office
between us, and I saw him every day.
I felt that there was always a distance between us
almost always now there were times when that would
break down and that's not to say it's not because he
was a formal guy it's just as you say there was this
veil this curtain that the inner workings of
harlow smith were not always visible that it was
very hard to know him as just another human being uh
he was uh very closed in that respect he was he was
intensely loyal as you say he was he was generous
but i never really felt that i knew the real harlan
except occasionally i would see it and one time i
mentioned to you the other night that what was very
obvious i was seeing the real harlan was when he
called frank bash and me into his office or into
frank's office this was after Harlan had quit as
director, and told the two of us that he had been
diagnosed with cancer, that it was going to be
really touch and go as to whether he could be cured
from this. uh and he was clearly very emotional
about it and frank asked him a question that had to
do with well to concentrate on winning this battle
are you you told chairman are you planning to lead
the faculty and not teach in the fall because he was
scheduled to teach and harlan said uh he said no
that he was he was going to tell the chairman but he
was going to teach in the fall he was going to stay on
the faculty he was going to continue his
appointment not take retirement because The only
security Joan had was his pension. And as he said
that, he literally teared up. And I have never seen
Harlan do that. I've never seen him do that before.
And this was a real person coming through, that he
cared deeply that Joan have whatever security he
could leave her if he didn't make it through this
illness. There were other times when he He was
generous and I could see a real human being there. I
had a bruising battle with David Evans one time
over the telescope schedule in which I
overstepped my bounds somewhat in a way that was
inappropriate and irritated David. David was
right. He had a very strong right to be irritated
with me. And so we ended up having a public meeting
in which we disagreed strongly with each other and
at the conclusion in which a decision needed to be
taken as to which of us was going to win and i was
already harlan's at that time i was assistant
director and at the end of the meeting harlan chose
david's position and uh and when i got back to my
office after that i had a small scrap of paper which
had obviously just been torn off of some other
larger piece of paper onto which was affixed a
band-aid. And next to the band-aid, Harlan had
written, one band-aid for one bruised ego, H. It
was a nice touch. It took an awful lot of the sting
out of him siding with David. He was right to do so,
but it was a nice touch. It was the kind of thing that
Harlan would do most unexpectedly. Do you think
that Harlan's gung-ho, let's go get him attitude
started to fall on the authorities in the last few
years, the authorities at the University of
Texas? I've heard that. Yeah, I think it did. I
don't think they were, I think they respected
Harlan's power, but I don't think they really
liked him.
I give you an example. When we were working to get
the 300-inch telescope project approved, no, I'm
sorry, let me back up. Let me give you a different
example. When we were, at one time, the
Space Telescope Science Institute was up for
grabs. Where was it going to go? And Harlan wanted
it to go in Austin. And so we were trying hard to get
it. And he was At that moment, we were changing
presidents at UT Austin. From who to who? We were
going from Maureen Rogers to Peter Flong. And
Jerry Falcon, who's now the provost and executive
vice president of the university, and has been for
many years, He was executive assistant to
Lorraine Rogers. I don't know his exact title, but
he was her right-hand man in her office. He wasn't
vice president of something or other. So we were
working through him, and we were trying hard to get
the university to put in a proposal for SDSCI. And
we
went to Jerry and said, can we do this? And Jerry
said, he said, Harlan, He said, I can't get this
done. He said, I'm between two presidents here who
can't deal with this. OK, well, after the
presidency changed, we went to Peter Flon.
uh we met him in the basement office of the geology
building i believe and he was in this little bitty
cubicle but he hadn't quite become president yet
and we harlan and i went to him and spoke to him about
this project and peter flawn had been at ut austin
when harlem was building the 107-inch and he knew
harlem and he'd been president after that he'd
been president ut san antonio So I looked him in the
eyes and said, I know the way you operate. I know the
way you work. And I need you to tell me the truth on
this. Have you already gone around me to the UT
system on this project? And Harlan said,
absolutely not. I would not do that. I've got to
work with you through channels. And I sat there
dumbfounded because I had personally delivered
the materials to Executive Vice Chancellor Jim
Duncan on this matter down at UT System and had
Duncan look me in the eye and said, you realize this
is out of channels? And I said, yes, sir, I know
that. My instructions are to give you this stuff.
The UT administration knew how he worked. They
respected his power, but I don't think they liked
him. And so Harlan really had a vicious streak. He
could double deal when it was necessary. That's
right. Not vicious, I mean. Vicious is not right.
It's more that he had a very strong belief in his
rightness. in that he was right, and that to some
extent, he'd never have said it this way, but to
some extent, the ends justified the means. It was
classic in faculty meetings when I was on the
faculty. It was absolutely classic the way he
would handle the faculty, in that he had a
proposal. He would bring it to the faculty to
discuss as was right and proper. There would be a
majority opposed to him, and so he would say, it's
clear we have not reached consensus on this yet, so
let's continue the discussion later. And he would
literally continue the discussion until he had a
majority. He would never let it not happen.
He knew he was right. I mean, he had no question but
that he was right. And I'm going to change the
subject. One of the things I put in this proposal
that NASA bought was that any good observatory, if
they're lucky, has somebody, and in the case of
McDonald's, it's Bob Tull, whose equipment we
have all used. And yet, those kind of guys don't get
to write scientific papers, and there's a guy,
John Geary, for example, at the Center for
Astrophysics, who's the Bob Tull of the Center for
Astrophysics. Without them, we'd all be dead
meat. Right. Right. Bob Tall is still alive and
well and kicking, but how do you handle those
people? How do you keep them on the payroll? I mean,
they're necessary, but they don't meet, I mean,
they're absolutely vital, but they don't meet the
qualifications of the philosophy department or
the English department or whatever. The way
Harlan did it with Bob Tall was that Just before I
got to Texas, I don't know how much before, maybe
the same year I got there, Bob was denied tenure, a
promotion from assistant professor to associate
professor by the faculty, I assume based on
publication criteria. Weight of paper. Weight of
paper and number of publications and science
done. Whereas he was clearly an unbelievable
talent, a world-class talent in
instrumentation. So Harlan told me later, And he
said this a number of different times in all the
time I knew him. So it's something that I know
happened, although I wasn't there to witness it.
And he said that after that decision was taken, he
told Bob Tull that as far as he and Harlan Smith was
concerned, Bob Tull had tenure. And that Bob Tull
had a job at McDonald's as long as Harlan Smith had a
job at McDonald's. And indeed, he would let
himself go before he would let Bob Tull go. And
that's the way it happened. How important has Bob
been to astronomy at UT? Crucial. Absolutely
crucial. Because our history through the 70s and
80s was based on our excellence in coup de
spectroscopy. And that excellence was built by a
number of different people. For example, David
Lambert, who was clearly one of the finest
observational astronomers in the world, doing
two-day spectroscopy. But his success was built
on the foundation that Bob Tall built. And if Bob
Tall had not been there, MacDonald wouldn't be
one-half, one-third what it is today in terms of
recognition throughout the astronomical
community. He was absolutely crucial.
Do you think that the... the last minute uh
decision to you know strike out the 300 inch you
know the last hour of the legislation you think
that took a lot of steam out of harlem yeah it did um
during that period of time that's all harlem did
was uh was the 300-inch telescope and uh when when
it was lying the primary mirror money was lined out
of the state budget because of the oil crisis it set
us back from a project that was on its way to
probable success i won't say certainty probable
success to a project that was most likely not going
to happen and harlan didn't really recognize that
for a little while he kept pushing it really hard
And as late as the year when Bill Cunningham became
president, changing over from Pete Flong, I
forget what year that was. It was probably 86 or 87.
We had a breakfast meeting, Harlan and I and key
members of the Board of Visitors, with Bill
Cunningham right early on in his tenure as
president. brought up the 300 inch telescope and
Bill looked him straight in the eye and said quite
loudly to the whole table, he said, Harlan, the 300
inch telescope is dead. Forget it. And I think that
was when it really became clear to Harlan that it
was over with. Did the torpedoing of the 300 inch
have any effect on the general faculty and staff at
McDonald's? I mean, were you guys in a dump, sir?
Yeah, I think there were several years where We
were kind of at a loss because it was obvious that we
needed more big telescopes. It had been obvious
for about 10 years from 1978 that we needed big
telescopes, another big telescope, and yet we had
no realistic possibility of getting one in the
near term. So that there was a period of time where
people were very upset. We almost lost David
Lambert to Ohio State on the basis of the Columbus
Project and their involvement in Columbus. It was
nip and tuck, and he ended up staying. But I
attribute the fact that he was interested in
leaving to this climate that we were living in at
that time. But Holland did what... what he'd
always done he proceeded to move on many fronts at
once and i and i agreed with him at that time on this
that we tried to get involved with the sophia
project using our connections uh through paul
harvey and through uh hans mark we moved on the
spectroscopic survey telescope through our
connection with dan weedman at kent state and
there were several other projects that were
thought to be worthy of pursuit that were explored
and one by one they fell out they didn't happen we we
didn't get involved except for the ssc inspector
scott survey teller and that one is now going to
come to pass um one last question uh the 107 inch
westinghouse was a fiasco as far as the mechanical
operation of the telescope i well know that Do you
think that has colored the attitude of the UT
administration towards the SST, Spectroscopic
Survey Telescope? Yes. The history of the UT
administration with respect to McDonald
Observatory has been that we consistently, from
their view, we consistently either lie to them
about how much it's going to cost or are
incompetent to figure out how much it costs.